KEP 2004: Evolving Topology Aware Routing for Services (#2005)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-network/2004-topology-aware-routing/README.md

    - [Optimizations](#optimizations)
    - [Distribution of EndpointSlices](#distribution-of-endpointslices)
    - [Rationale](#rationale)
    - [Potential Issues](#potential-issues)
  - [Other Algorithms Evaluated](#other-algorithms-evaluated)
    - [Local-Shared](#local-shared)
      - [Rationale](#rationale-1)
      - [Potential Issues](#potential-issues-1)
    - [Local-Weighted](#local-weighted)
      - [Rationale](#rationale-2)
      - [Potential Issues](#potential-issues-2)
    - [Local-Opt](#local-opt)
      - [Rationale](#rationale-3)
      - [Potential Issues](#potential-issues-3)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Observability](#observability)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [ ] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input

> - [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place

Reviewer: As a note: Graduation Criteria should be included for this KEP by Enhancements Freeze (Oct 6th)

Reviewer 2: Thanks @kikisdeliveryservice! Do we need to cover what's required to be ready for alpha or what might be required to graduate from alpha to beta?

Reviewer: Yes please add what's required for alpha, but if you also have details of the alpha->beta, you can add those as well :+1:

Author: Have added a `Graduation Criteria` for alpha. Thanks for the feedback!

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Kubernetes clusters are increasingly deployed in multi-zone environments but
unfortunately network routing has not caught up with that. This doc proposes an

> automatic topology aware routing mechanism with a new Service annotation. This

Reviewer 3: I'm assuming that the "topology routing mechanism" will also use the well known labels `topology.kubernetes.io/zone` https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/labels-annotations-taints/#topologykubernetesiozone , is that correct?
if affirmative can we add a small comment mentioning it?

Author: This a good point, thanks for the feedback! Added the usage of this label in the `Goal` section.

new annotation will provide three options of different routing options.
Currently our proposal will only focus on topology aware routing at zone level.

## Motivation

Kubernetes clusters are increasingly deployed in multi-zone environments.
Network traffic is routed randomly to any endpoint matching a Service. Some
users might want the traffic to stay in the same zone for the following
reasons:
  - Cost savings: Keeping traffic within a zone can limit cross-zone networking
costs.

>   - Performance: Traffic within a zone is often more performant than traffic
> leaving the zone.

Reviewer 3: nit 
```suggestion
  - Performance: Traffic within a zone usually has less latency and bandwidth contraints, having a better performance than traffic leaving the zone.
```

Author: Thanks for the detailed description! Updated.

- Minimize the number of new EndpointSlices required.
- Provide a simple API that does not require any new API fields.

### Non-Goals
- Real-time distribution rebalancing based on traffic load or distribution
feedback or metrics.
- Providing a way for kube-proxy to consume subsets of EndpointSlices (this is
a separate KEP).
- Providing a way to require Node local traffic ([this is a separate KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1944)).
- Multi-cluster topology aware routing (this same pattern may be useful there
though).
- Region based topology aware routing (this may come later).
- Ensuring that endpoints are distributed evenly across zones.

## Proposal

### Terminology

- **EndpointSlice Group**: One or multiple EndpointSlices that will be consumed
by the same set of zones.
- **Endpoints**: In this KEP, “endpoints” are used to describe individual Pod
IPs. These are not references to Kubernetes Endpoints resources. We also omit
the unready pods that number of endpoints = number of pods.

### Configuration

This proposal builds off of the [EndpointSlice API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/).

> We propose a new Service annotation: `endpointslice.kubernetes.io/same-zone`

Reviewer 3: heh naming party :smile:

Reviewer 2: Haha, this will be tricky name to get right. I like the idea of zone-affinity, what would the values be here? I'm not sure `Prefer` or `Require` would make as much sense with this name.

Reviewer 3: what about `hard` , `soft` and `none` ?

this aligns with node affinity terminoloy https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#node-affinity

Reviewer 2: One of our goals with this kind of naming pattern is that we could use the same approach for node and region (`same-node`, `same-region`). Unfortunately I think that would be difficult/confusing for an `affinity` based name as `node-affinity` already has a different meaning in k8s. Still very interested in naming suggestions here, just hesitant to use something that might not work as well for node or region.

Reviewer 2: Finding the appropriate name here is definitely challenging. We actually explored options similar to what you're suggesting here. My first suggestion for an annotation was `endpointslice.kubernetes.io/slicing-policy` which seems similar to the concept of an endpoint selection policy. We ended up moving away from that since it seemed too closely tied to implementation and would not translate well for node-local config.

We also explored algorithm/policy names and created a [doc with possible combinations](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Iul7rRTx_knezvPdwqZ9SQxEYUUXMTDnjCeYmNmcEGA/edit?usp=sharing). In this case it felt like there were simply too many potential combinations.

As I've thought about this KEP more, I think the title/scope may actually be a bit too broad here. This is fundamentally about trying to find smarter ways to subset EndpointSlices so that:
- Consumers only need to process a fraction of endpoints (significant scalability win).
- Consumers only get the endpoints closest to them.

This does not feel like it is the final solution for topology aware routing, just a step in the right direction. This will still allow more advanced logic to be built into consumers that could potentially make adjustments based on feedback/metrics. If we take that kind of a more limited approach to this KEP, maybe a narrower name/annotation would also make sense?

endpoints for the Service.
- `Prefer`: EndpointSlice controller will conduct a more conservative routing
mechanism. It will keep traffic in zone as long as each zone has a sufficient
number of endpoints. If a zone does not have a sufficient number of endpoints,
traffic will be routed to other zones.

This same pattern could be used for topology aware routing at node and region
level. We could add new annotations `endpointslice.kubernetes.io/same-node` and
`endpointslice.kubernetes.io/same-region` for node and region respectively with
the same values `Require` and `Prefer`. With all these three levels combined
together, their individual value could be influenced by values of others, i.e.
`Require` node would also `Require` zone and region.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

In the future, we may introduce another parameter for the `Prefer` approach
that would allow users to specify a starting threshold. Starting threshold
defines the starting point for `Prefer` (more detailed description below). We
currently set the starting threshold to 3x the number of zones based on results
from our test dataset for safer distribution results.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 3: it also will add an overhead to the endpointslice controller that may lag to update other endpoint slices, is this a scalability risk?

Reviewer 2: Yeah that's a good point. The added complexity could result in slower updates and end up limiting scalability (hopefully not though).

Author: Added the concern to this section.

- When users opt-in to the `Require` routing scheme, it is their responsibility
to make sure the workloads are balanced.
- In a scenario where all traffic originates from a single zone, with `Require`
and `Prefer` options, there is a chance that endpoints in that zone will be
overloaded while endpoints in other zones receive little to no traffic.

## Design Details

### Assumptions

- Incoming traffic is proportional to the number of nodes in a zone. Although
this is an imperfect metric, it is the best available way of predicting how
much traffic will be received in a zone. We could alternatively consider basing
this on the number of cores in a zone.
- Service capacity is proportional to the number of endpoints in a zone. This
assumes that each endpoint has equivalent capacity. Although this is not always
true, it usually is. We can explore ways to deal with variable capacity
endpoints in the future.

### Kube-Proxy

Kube-Proxy will be updated to support EndpointSlice subsetting. Each instance
will watch for EndpointSlices that have a label indicating they should be

> consumed by this zone. For more information, refer to the EndpointSlice

Reviewer 3: can we expand on this? how will kube-proxy know when it has to install routes to other zones or no?

Reviewer 2: I owe another KEP here. The general idea would be adding a label to EndpointSlices like `endpointslice.kubernetes.io/for-zone: zone-a`. Then kube-proxy could be configured to only subscribe to EndpointSlices with that label set to the same zone or not set at all.

Reviewer 2: Yeah that is quite messy. I'd missed that there's no way to express `OR` with selectors. This combination of selectors could work but would be bad if it dramatically increases the number of informers in kube-proxy/number of connections to api server from each node.

This could be a compelling reason to add some kind of global label to slices that didn't apply to a zone or region. That would allow us to express all of this with a single selector but unfortunately would result in all EndpointSlices being updated whenever this upgrade happened. This would also require any EndpointSlice producers to be updated.

Reviewer 2: Now that I've filed https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/2031, I think this discussion will actually make more sense there. I ended up taking a similar approach to what @danwinship proposed above with that proposal with the exception of no support for node labels/delivery.

| |  | Endpoints below `starting threshold + padding` | `Prefer` approach will not be conducted | |
| |  | Endpoints above `starting threshold + padding` | `Prefer` works as expected | |
| Approach Transition Test | Unit Test | 1.Set annotation to `Prefer` <br>2. Increase endpoints number to above `starting threshold` but below `starting threshold + padding` | `Prefer` will not be conducted | If capable, monitor the churn of EndpointSlices during the rolling update |
|  |  | 1.Set annotation to `Prefer` <br>2. Increase endpoints number to above `starting threshold + padding` | Distribution will be changed from `Balanced` to `Prefer` | Same as above |
|  |  | 1.Set annotation to `Prefer` <br>2. Decrease endpoints number to below `starting threshold` but above `starting threshold - padding` | Distribution will remain `Prefer` | Same as above |
|  |  | 1.Set annotation to `Prefer` <br>2. Decrease endpoints number to below `starting threshold - padding` | Distribution will be changed from `Prefer` to `Balanced` | Same as above |

> |  |  | 1.Set annotation to one of the three <br>2. Set endpoints to above `starting threshold + padding` <br> 3. Manually change the annotation to another approach | Distribution will be changed based on the new value | Step 2 is only needed for `Prefer` |

Reviewer 3: We should have a variation with a more specific scenario of Rollback, i.e. 
as a user I have Balanced, I move to Prefer but I'm not happy with the results so I want to move back to Balanced

Author: Thanks for pointing it out! Added a new test case with approaches changed from `Balanced` to `Prefer` and switch back to `Balanced`.

> | Rolling Update Test | E2E Test |1.Set annotation to `Prefer` <br>2. Conduct an aggressive rolling update policy for endpoints update <br> 3. Set endpoints to test corner cases | In the desired state, EndpointSlices are distributed as expected | If capable, monitor the churn of EndpointSlices during the rolling update |

Reviewer 3: I'm wondering if the integration framework will be better suited for some of these tests,  since we are stressing only the endpointslice controller and we can mock the pods, it will allow us to create larger topologies and to instrument the test so we can calculate the churn rate, .... and fail the test on those parameters

Author: This makes sense. Thanks for the feedback, updated!

unfortunately network routing has not caught up with that. This KEP proposes an
automatic topology aware routing mechanism with a new Service annotation. This
new annotation will provide three options of different routing options.
Currently our proposal will only focus on topology aware routing at zone level.

## Motivation

Kubernetes clusters are increasingly deployed in multi-zone environments.
Network traffic is routed randomly to any endpoint matching a Service. Some
users might want the traffic to stay in the same zone for the following
reasons:
  - Cost savings: Keeping traffic within a zone can limit cross-zone networking
costs.
  - Performance: Traffic within a zone usually has less latency and bandwidth
constraints, having a better performance than traffic leaving the zone.

In this KEP we are going to focus on avoiding cross-zone traffic when in-zone
endpoints would suffice. We're attempting to provide a simple and more
automatic approach to topology aware routing. This API will still allow users
to require traffic to stay within a zone, or simply to indicate that they
prefer to keep traffic in the same zone if there's sufficient capacity. With

> this approach no new API fields are required, we can accomplish this simply

Reviewer 2: That's a great point. I think that b) is probably realistic if we settle on a relatively conservative approach for the `Prefer` algorithm. I think it would be ideal for users not to have to configure anything by default for most Services so ideally an annotation would be sufficient here.

> this approach no new API fields are required, we can accomplish this simply

Reviewer 4: "users not to have to configure anything by default" is orthogonal to annotation vs field.

In the past we've put a lot of details about the implementation into the Service API.  I'd like to avoid doing that again, so we need to figure out which way this is aligned.  It's not obvious.

> this approach no new API fields are required, we can accomplish this simply

Reviewer 2: Good call, updated to clarify that.

with a new annotation on Service.

### Goals
- Provide a simple way for users to indicate their preference for keeping
traffic in zone.
- Provide different approaches to users who have a strong desire over the
routing policy:

>   - Balanced: Use the original approach to ensure traffic is distributed across

Reviewer 2: Updated, thanks!

>   - Balanced: Use the original approach to ensure traffic is distributed across

Reviewer 4: I'm still not sure "Balanced" vs "Spread" vs "Random"

>   - Balanced: Use the original approach to ensure traffic is distributed across

Reviewer 3: I like Random/Randomized because it carries the iptables extension name used by kube-proxy, kind of tribute :smile:

>   - Balanced: Use the original approach to ensure traffic is distributed across

Reviewer 2: Updated to random for now since it seems to be the most common suggestion. Open to other ideas, especially if we end up changing the name of the field/annotation.

  all endpoints for a Service.
  - RequireZone: Only route to endpoints within the same zone.
  - PreferZone: Prefer routing to endpoints within the same zone when they are

>   available.

Reviewer 2: Good call, added some clarification here.

- Use the standardized topology label `topology.kubernetes.io/zone` to derive
the zones of nodes and endpoints.
- Use EndpointSlice subsetting as the primary mechanism for topology aware
routing.
  - Improve kube-proxy scalability by limiting the number of endpoints it needs
  to process.
- Minimize churn of EndpointSlices while doing topology aware distribution.
- Minimize the number of new EndpointSlices required.

> - Provide a simple API that does not require any new API fields.

Reviewer 2: I think we were trying to highlight that this could be accomplished purely with simple annotations and would not necessarily require a new API field. With that said, I think it's better to focus on the minimal configuration necessary to use this feature so I've reworded this to focus on that.

### Non-Goals
- Real-time distribution rebalancing based on traffic load or distribution
feedback or metrics.

> - Providing a way for kube-proxy to consume subsets of EndpointSlices (this is

Reviewer 2: Will add a link here shortly. Until then: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/2031

> - Providing a way for kube-proxy to consume subsets of EndpointSlices (this is

Reviewer 2: Updated now

routing.
  - Improve kube-proxy scalability by limiting the number of endpoints it needs
  to process.
- Minimize churn of EndpointSlices while doing topology aware distribution.
- Minimize the number of new EndpointSlices required.
- Provide a simple API that does not require any new API fields.

### Non-Goals
- Real-time distribution rebalancing based on traffic load or distribution
feedback or metrics.
- Providing a way for kube-proxy to consume subsets of EndpointSlices (this is
a separate KEP).
- Providing a way to require Node local traffic ([this is a separate KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1944)).
- Multi-cluster topology aware routing (this same pattern may be useful there
though).
- Region based topology aware routing (this may come later).
- Ensuring that endpoints are distributed evenly across zones.

## Proposal

### Terminology

- **EndpointSlice Group**: One or multiple EndpointSlices that will be consumed
by the same set of zones.
- **Endpoints**: In this KEP, “endpoints” are used to describe individual Pod
IPs. These are not references to Kubernetes Endpoints resources. We also omit

> the unready pods that number of endpoints = number of pods.

Reviewer 2: Good call, ended up removing this sentence.

### Configuration

This proposal builds off of the [EndpointSlice API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/).

We propose a new Service annotation: `service.kubernetes.io/same-zone`
with three options:

> - `Balanced`: This is the default, it does not need to be specified which also

Reviewer 2: Would "Original" be appropriate here? I guess that implies we would not change this approach to also include some form of subsetting in the future... Maybe "Even" or "Distributed" would work here as the goal of this approach would be to distribute traffic evenly among endpoints. Certainly depends on what we end up choosing for the annotation name.

provides backward compatibility for users. It represents the existing approach
that is already used, no special mechanism will be added. Traffic will be
evenly distributed among endpoints behind a Service.

> - `Require`: EndpointSlice controller will conduct a simple but aggressive

Reviewer 2: Completely agreed, this is a dangerous option but also quite simple and powerful when used with other Kubernetes techniques to distribute workloads evenly.

routing mechanism. It will group endpoints in a zone to an EndpointSlice Group
that only receives traffic from that zone. `Require` requires users to ensure
that a sufficient number of endpoints for a Service exist in each zone.
Services using this approach will only be reachable from zones that contain
endpoints for the Service.
- `Prefer`: EndpointSlice controller will conduct a more conservative routing
mechanism. It will keep traffic in zone as long as each zone has a sufficient
number of endpoints. If a zone does not have a sufficient number of endpoints,

> traffic will be routed to other zones.

Reviewer 2: Updated, thanks!

> This same pattern could be used for topology aware routing at node and region

Reviewer 2: I think Zone and Region are very closely related. Node is definitely more of a stretch. This becomes a bit of a question of what our config is saying though. If the config is saying this Service should prefer/require routing to the same node/zone/region, I think it makes sense to keep the config consistent (as currently proposed). On the other hand, if we're more focused on this feature as "how we subset EndpointSlices" and the configuration reflects that, I don't think we should have the same config for node-local traffic.

> This same pattern could be used for topology aware routing at node and region

Reviewer 4: I am leaning pretty hard away from multiple knobs here.  I think something more abstract makes more sense.  Especially if you think about multi-cluster Services here.  E.g. If the MCS thingy already does some form of subsetting, what does this policy mean?  @JeremyOT

> This same pattern could be used for topology aware routing at node and region

Reviewer 2: I explored combining this into a single setting and it got pretty overwhelming pretty quickly, especially if nodes were involved. Here's a [doc with some of the potential combinations this would result in](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Iul7rRTx_knezvPdwqZ9SQxEYUUXMTDnjCeYmNmcEGA/edit?usp=sharing). Even if we were just covering zone and region, we'd potentially need to support 6 different values: 

- RequireZone
- PreferZone
- PreferZonePreferRegion
- PreferZoneRequireRegion
- RequireRegion
- PreferRegion

If we want to support different settings for zone and region in the future, I think it's preferable to split that config out instead of squashing everything into a single field.

> This same pattern could be used for topology aware routing at node and region

Reviewer 2: Since there's a lot of comments/threads here, I'll copy some relevant points from another thread:

We could transition to a single EndpointSlice specific annotation/field like `endpointslice.kubernetes.io/slicing-policy` and support the following values:

- One of `None`, `Random`, `Shared`, or `Balanced`
- `PreferZone`
- `RequireZone`

> This same pattern could be used for topology aware routing at node and region

Reviewer 2: As a follow up here, we could potentially simplify the above options into:

- RequireZone
- PreferZone
- RequireRegion (infers PreferZone)
- PreferRegion (infers PreferZone)

> This same pattern could be used for topology aware routing at node and region

Reviewer 2: I'm a little worried that `slicing-policy` is too close to the actual implementation details here, but that does make room for more advanced topology aware routing solutions to be built on top of this in the future.

level. We could add new annotations `service.kubernetes.io/same-node` and
`service.kubernetes.io/same-region` for node and region respectively with
the same values `Require` and `Prefer`. With all these three levels combined
together, their individual value could be influenced by values of others, i.e.
`Require` node would also `Require` zone and region.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

> In the future, we may introduce another parameter for the `Prefer` approach

Reviewer 2: Updated to add `if there is sufficient need`.

that would allow users to specify a starting threshold. Starting threshold
defines the starting point for `Prefer` (more detailed description below). We
currently set the starting threshold to 3x the number of zones based on results
from our test dataset for safer distribution results.

### Risks and Mitigations

- Extra complexity to EndpointSlice Controller introduced by `Require` and
`Prefer` could result in slower EndpointSlices update and potentially end up
limiting scalability.
- When users opt-in to the `Require` routing scheme, it is their responsibility
to make sure the workloads are balanced.
- In a scenario where all traffic originates from a single zone, with `Require`
and `Prefer` options, there is a chance that endpoints in that zone will be

> overloaded while endpoints in other zones receive little to no traffic.

Reviewer 2: Good clarification, added.

## Design Details

### Assumptions

- Incoming traffic is proportional to the number of nodes in a zone. Although
this is an imperfect metric, it is the best available way of predicting how
much traffic will be received in a zone. We could alternatively consider basing

> this on the number of cores in a zone.

Reviewer 2: Would this be based off of `node.status.capacity`? It looks like that is an [optional field](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/api/core/v1/types.go#L4585). Is there another place this is specified that we could consistently rely on?

> this on the number of cores in a zone.

Reviewer 4: regarding cores, yeah I would look at `allocatable`, and if that is not present then `capacity`, and if those are not present, I don't think the node can be scheduled to.  @ahg-g to confirm?

> this on the number of cores in a zone.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good. Updated this to use allocatable cores instead.

- Service capacity is proportional to the number of endpoints in a zone. This
assumes that each endpoint has equivalent capacity. Although this is not always
true, it usually is. We can explore ways to deal with variable capacity
endpoints in the future.

### Kube-Proxy

Kube-Proxy will be updated to support EndpointSlice subsetting. Each instance
will watch for EndpointSlices that have a label indicating they should be
consumed by this zone. For more information, refer to the EndpointSlice
subsetting KEP.

### Balanced

As for the balanced approach, we do not need to change anything in the current
system. When requests come in, they will be evenly distributed among all the
endpoints of a service.

> Absent of the `service.kubernetes.io/same-zone` annotation or any other values

Reviewer 2: Removed this here and added a concept of a controller-configured default above.

for this key other than `Require` and `Prefer` will be interpreted as
`Balanced` approach required.

#### Scheme Logic:

> 1. Group all endpoints in a single global EndpointSlice Group.

Reviewer 2: This was sorta kinda covered in the version skew section, I've expanded on that now so it's more clear. Is there a better place to add that clarification?

### Require
`Require` groups endpoints in a zone to an EndpointSlice Group that only
receives traffic from that zone, users have to ensure the distribution of
endpoints is balanced.
Users specify `RequireZone` approach by adding
`service.kubernetes.io/same-zone`: `Require` in annotations of a Service

#### Scheme Logic:
1. Group all endpoints in a zone in a local EndpointSlice Group.

<img
src="https://github.com/robscott/k8s-enhancements/blob/topology-aware-routing/keps/sig-network/2004-topology-aware-routing/require.png"
alt="Require IMG" width="600">

### Prefer

> #### Terminology

Reviewer 2: Updated, thanks!

   extra endpoints when they have endpoints > expected endpoints. This ends
   when one of the conditions meets:
   - `endpoints_available` pool is empty.
   - All zones have at least the flooring number of expected endpoints in their
  local SliceGroup.

ZoneA, ZoneB, ZoneC expect 3.2, 1.6, 0.2 endpoints respectively.

<img
src="https://github.com/robscott/k8s-enhancements/blob/topology-aware-routing/keps/sig-network/2004-topology-aware-routing/ep-distribution.png"
alt="ep distribution" width="600">

ZoneA gives one extra endpoint to ZoneC to help ZoneC maintain overload.

<img
src="https://github.com/robscott/k8s-enhancements/blob/topology-aware-routing/keps/sig-network/2004-topology-aware-routing/ep-distribution2.png"
alt="ep distribution" width="600">

ZoneA has to give one more endpoint to ZoneB to help ZoneB maintain overload.

<img
src="https://github.com/robscott/k8s-enhancements/blob/topology-aware-routing/keps/sig-network/2004-topology-aware-routing/ep-distribution3.png"
alt="ep distribution" width="600">

ZoneA ends with endpoints fewer than expected. But its overload is still below
threshold.

<img

> src="https://github.com/robscott/k8s-enhancements/blob/topology-aware-routing/keps/sig-network/2004-topology-aware-routing/ep-distribution4.png"

Reviewer 4: fix these links to be relative?

Reviewer 2: Updated, thanks!

alt="ep distribution" width="600">

During our tests among different datasets, we found that with a large number of
total endpoints it is less likely to have cases described in step 4, that's one
of the reasons we introduced the starting threshold for this mechanism.
Meanwhile as described above, we may open the starting threshold as a
configurable parameter for users. This might be updated after collecting enough
feedback from users.

#### Rationale
1. Easy to implement and acceptable churn of EndpointSlices
2. Relatively high in-zone traffic
3. Balanced deviation for endpoints
4. No weights involved -- no API additions needed

#### Potential Issues

> 1. Can't deal with the single-zone traffic case described above

Reviewer 4: but you work around it by degrading, right?

Reviewer 2: This was confusing - we were trying to describe the possibility of overloaded endpoints if a large portion of traffic originates from a single zone. I've updated this to be more clear. You're right that we would downgrade if a single-zone simply had far too many nodes/endpoints to effectively balance - we just don't have any feedback available to downgrade based on where traffic ends up originating from.

### Non-Goals
- Real-time distribution rebalancing based on traffic load or distribution
  feedback or metrics.
- Providing a way for kube-proxy to consume subsets of EndpointSlices. (This is
  covered by [KEP 2030](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2030)).
- Providing a way to require Node local traffic ([this is a separate
  KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1944)).
- Multi-cluster topology aware routing (this same pattern may be useful there
  though).
- Region based topology aware routing (this may come later).
- Ensuring that endpoints are distributed evenly across zones.

## Proposal

### Terminology

- **EndpointSlice Group**: One or multiple EndpointSlices that will be consumed
  by the same set of zones.
- **Endpoints**: In this KEP, “endpoints” are used to describe individual Pod
  IPs. These are not references to Kubernetes Endpoints resources.

### Configuration

This proposal builds off of the [EndpointSlice API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/).

We propose a new Service annotation: `service.kubernetes.io/same-zone`
with three options:

> - `Balanced`: This represents the existing approach that is already used, no

Reviewer 4: Comment got lost: I am afraid "balanced" implies more than we actually guarantee. Would "Random" be a better choice here? We don't guarantee to balance traffic, just spread it.

Reviewer 5: What about "Unaware"?

Reviewer 2: To go a slightly different direction here, let's say we had a different field/annotation here that encompassed both zone and region and supported values like `PreferZone`. 

Maybe that annotation is something like `endpointslice.kubernetes.io/slicing-policy` and maybe the supported values are:

- One of `None`,  `Random`, `Shared`, or `Balanced`
- `PreferZone`
- `RequireZone`

I don't think `same-zone: Random` or `same-zone: Balanced` make a lot of sense in comparison. This is a bit of a larger change though and changes the scope of this KEP + config from solving `topology aware routing` to defining a controller subsetting approach that helps implement topology aware routing.

for the `Prefer` approach that would allow users to specify a starting
threshold. Starting threshold defines the starting point for `Prefer` (more
detailed description below). We currently set the starting threshold to 3x the
number of zones based on results from our test dataset for safer distribution
results.

### Risks and Mitigations

- Extra complexity to EndpointSlice Controller introduced by `Require` and
  `Prefer` could result in slower EndpointSlices update and potentially end up
  limiting scalability.
- When users opt-in to the `Require` routing scheme, it is their responsibility
  to make sure the workloads are balanced.
- In a scenario where all traffic originates from a single zone, with `Require`
  and `Prefer` options, there is a chance that endpoints in that zone will be
  overloaded while endpoints in other zones receive little to no traffic.
  Without some sort of feedback (out of scope) this will not self-rectify.

## Design Details

### Assumptions

- Incoming traffic is proportional to the number of nodes in a zone. Although
  this is an imperfect metric, it is the best available way of predicting how

>   much traffic will be received in a zone. We could alternatively consider

Reviewer 4: comment got lost: I think # of cores is the right metric - we know users have heterogeneous clusters.

Reviewer 2: Updated to use # of cores.

|  |  | 1. Set approach to `Balanced` <br> 2. Set endpoints to above `starting threshold + padding` <br> 3. Manually change the annotation to `Require` or `Prefer` <br> 4. Change the approach back to `Balanced` | Distribution will be changed from `Balanced` to `Require` or `Prefer` and changed back to `Balanced` | Step 2 is only needed for `Prefer` |
| Rolling Update Test | Integration Test |1. Use integration framework to mock pods <br> 2. Set annotation to `Prefer` <br> 3. Conduct an aggressive rolling update policy for endpoints update <br> 4. Set endpoints to test corner cases | In the desired state, EndpointSlices are distributed as expected | If capable, monitor the churn of EndpointSlices during the rolling update |
| Traffic Reliability Test | E2E Test |1. Set annotation to `Require` and `Prefer` <br> 2. Set endpoints above `starting threshold + padding` <br> 3. Reuse the current traffic reachability test | Endpoints are reachable from different zones as expected | Step 2 is only needed for `Prefer` |

> ### Observability

Reviewer 5: It would be good for administrators to know **which services** are "blowing out" of their zone. So, while it breaks tradition, I can't think of any way to do this besides a per-service metric.

This could also be an event, but that seems un-ergonomic.

Reviewer 2: How would this metric be determined? If endpoints are being contributed from one zone to another for a Service?

Reviewer 5: That's what I was thinking, yes. Otherwise you have no way of knowing which services need to be "re-balanced".  (I'm open to other suggestions - I just want to write an alert that says "service XXX may be costing you money")

Reviewer 3: you can label the metrics with the zone name, so you can build a graph that shows the metrics per zone. 
I did something similar to the cidr_sets https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/90288/ , so you can have metrics per each cidr_set configured

Reviewer 2: I agree this would be a valuable metric to have, but I think per-Service metrics may end up becoming a scalability issue. If we made these per-zone we'd potentially end up with data evening out across all Services in that zone even if there were significant discrepancies within each Service. Any ideas @wojtek-t?

Reviewer 4: Would it be sufficient to note the number of imbalanced Services and then decorate the Service object itself (or EPSlices?) with an annotation or Condition to say "is imbalanced" ?

for Services without an annotation specified. For backwards compatibility this
will initially default to the `Random` approach.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

In the future, if there is sufficient need, we may introduce another parameter
for the `Prefer` approach that would allow users to specify a starting
threshold. Starting threshold defines the starting point for `Prefer` (more
detailed description below). We currently set the starting threshold to 3x the
number of zones based on results from our test dataset for safer distribution
results.

### Risks and Mitigations

- Extra complexity to EndpointSlice Controller introduced by `Require` and
  `Prefer` could result in slower EndpointSlices update and potentially end up
  limiting scalability.
- When users opt-in to the `Require` routing scheme, it is their responsibility
  to make sure the workloads are balanced.
- In a scenario where all traffic originates from a single zone, with `Require`
  and `Prefer` options, there is a chance that endpoints in that zone will be
  overloaded while endpoints in other zones receive little to no traffic.
  Without some sort of feedback (out of scope) this will not self-rectify.

> 

Reviewer 3: @robscott I have this doubt, can a pod in ZoneB access a Service with `service.kubernetes.io/same-zone: Require` that only has endpoints in ZoneA?
I mean,  the traffic load "service-endpoint" will be withing the zone, but at least in kube-proxy the ClusterIP -> Endpoint translation is done in the same node used by the pod client. how this traffic will be redirected to the other zone?

Reviewer 2: It would not be able to. That approach relies on the user distributing workloads across all zones they intend to send traffic to. This could work well with some cross-sig work that would make this kind of scheduling easier and potentially update autoscaling to also take topology into account. I don't imagine this being a commonly used option at the beginning but I think it's still valuable for power users. I'll work on a better explanation for this in the KEP.

Reviewer 2: I've added some better clarification around this to the KEP now.
